We're going to talk now about the shape of
the Jacobian matrix. A robot manipulator has
in general got N joints, N could be a small
number, the robot might have only two
joints. The robots might have 100 joints.
I want to understand what's the effect of
the number of joints on the shape of the robot
manipulator Jacobian matrix, because the Jacobian
has one column per joint. So, an N joint robot
has a manipulator Jacobian matrix with N columns.
The Jacobian has one row for each element
of the spatial velocity vector. So, for motion
in three dimensions, the spatial velocity
vector has got 6 elements – 3 for translational
velocity and 3 for angular velocity. And,
that means the Jacobian matrix always has
six rows. So, the robot manipulator Jacobian
matrix is a 6 x N matrix.
This robot only has 4 joints and we call it
an under actuated robot. And, that means that
its task space doesn't cover all of the set
SE3. Although the end effector can achieve
all positions within the limits of its works
space, it's not able to achieve all possible orientations.
So, for example, when the robot in a configuration
like this, it can adjust the orientation of
the gripper like that. But, it's impossible
for it to adjust the orientation of the gripper
in that direction or in that direction.
Let's consider the case of a robot with only
4 joints. This is often referred to as an
under-actuated robotic system. In this case,
the robot Jacobian has got 6 rows and 4 columns.
The Jacobian is not square, and therefore,
we cannot invert it. But that's not necessarily
a problem. A robot like this is unable to
rotate the tool about the x or y axis. It's
just the way it's constructed. It cannot rotate
the tool in that way. So, we can strike out
these elements of the robot’s spatial velocity.
Since we can't control velocity around these
axes, let's just remove them.
If I do that, then I should also remove the
corresponding rows in the Jacobian matrix.
And, the result now is a 4 x 4 system. And
now, the Jacobian matrix is invertible. Given
a desired spatial velocity, it's a smaller
spatial velocity vector now. We can compute
the robot joint angle velocities. We need
to obtain that spatial velocity.
Here's a robot that has perhaps 100 joints.
In this case, the manipulator Jacobian is
a 6 x 100 matrix. It's not square and we
cannot invert it. We can compute something
called the pseudo-inverse and that's often
denoted by the symbol plus.
The pseudo-inverse is computed in this way.
This looks quite straight forward until you
remind yourself that the term inside here
is in fact a 100 x 100 matrix and we need to
invert that. And computationally, that's not
a simple thing to do. However, if we use this
pseudo-inverse, we can write an expression
that relates the desired spatial velocity
of the robots end effector to the required
velocity of each of its 100 joints.
But we can do an extra thing as well in the case
of a robot like this – a robot with more
than 6 joints. We can add this term here and
we refer to this as the null-space motion.
It's pre-multiplied by this matrix expression
here, which effectively filters it, so that
this motion does not affect the pose of the
robot end effector. We can use this motion,
which doesn't affect the end effector pose
to do things like change the shape of the
arm. We can also use it to do things like
move a robot joint away from its limit towards
the middle part of its working range.
So, we use this extra joint velocity motion
to change the shape of the arm, move joints
away from their limits. At the same time not
affecting the end effector pose. It's a pretty
neat trick. This matrix N is referred to as
the null space of the Jacobian matrix. It
is the set of vectors that pre-multiplied
by the manipulator Jacobian matrix, give a
result of zero. In this particular case, if
the robot had 100 joints, then the null space
seria a dimensão 94. Isto é 100 menos
6. Então, N seria uma matriz de 6 x 94 elementos
Vou importar o modelo de um redundante
robô que se move em 3D e esse é o modelo
hyper 3D. E, vou pedir um robô
com 20 articulações. Para ilustrar, por exemplo
Preciso escolher um conjunto de ângulos de articulação. eu
precisa escolher 20 números. Eu sei que se
eles são todos iguais a zero, o robô irá
estar em uma singularidade.
Então, o que vou fazer é escolher 20
números aleatórios. Vou usar o MATLAB para contruir
uma função rand. Então, este é o meu ângulo de articulação,
um vetor de 20 números aleatórios no intervalo de
0 à 1. E eu posso plotar esta configuração de uma
articulação em particular para um robô e isto é
o que parece. Se eu posso ter um bit
de vizualização ao redor, podemos ver que
a ponta ligeiramente pra cima e tem alguns
curvas e torções nele.
Agora que tenho o conjunto de ângulos de articulações e
eu tenho um modelo de robô, posso calcular a matrix
Jacobiana. E vimos como fazer isso para
muitos outros tipos de robôs. Eu uso o método
Jacobiano e eu passo no conjunto de ângulos articulares.
E, esta é a matrix Jacobiana. Podemos ver
que tem 6 linhas e 20 colunas
porque existem 20 articulações.
Se eu tentar inverter esta matriz, vou
obter um erro porque a matriz não é
quadrada. O MATLAB está me dizendo que eu não posso fazer isso
mas posso calcular o pseudo-inverso. Que
é calculado usando o MATLAB na construção da
função pinv e passar na matriz Jacobiana.
E, este é o resultado da pseudo-inversa.
E podemos ver o que temos no espaço de trabalho
agora uma matriz 20 x 6, a pseudo-inversa de
a matriz Jacobiana.
Agora, falamos sobre o movimento do espaço nulo.
E, a fim de calcular o movimento do espaço nulo,
precisamos calcular o espaço nulo da matriz
Jacobiano e o MATLAB têm a função de fazer isso.
É a função nula, aqui a matriz
Jacobiano e aqui está a matriz de espaço nulo.
A matriz de espaço nulo tem 20 linhas e apenas
14 colunas. 14 vem de 20, que é o
número de colunas  na matriz original
menos 6. E 6 é a classificação da matriz
Jacobiana. Esse é o número de colunas na matriz Jacobiana.
Então, havia 6 únicas
colunas e 14 colunas que existe
no espaço nulo daquela matriz. 14 mais
6 é igual a 20, o número original de colunas.
Vamos resumir algumas das diferentes formas
que uma matriz Jacobiana pode ter. Para
o caso de um robô com 6 articulações, dizemos
que o robô está totalmente acionado. A matriz
Jacobinana será quadrada 6 x 6. E um robô
com 6 juntas é capaz de acessar totalmente
as posições dentro de SE3.
Isso significa que em qualquer posição e qualquer
orientação. Para o caso de um robô com
menos de 6 juntas, que chamamos de
robô sub-atuado,a matriz Jacobiana será 6 x N.
Ele terá mais linhas do que colunas.
Isso significa que o robô não pode acessar todos
possíveis poses dentro de um SE3. E, em ordem
usar a matriz para fins de controle,
precisamos corrigir isso e fazemos isso
removendo alguns graus de liberdade espaciais.
Eliminamos algumas linhas na matriz Jacobiana
para que se torne uma matriz 5 x 5 ou 4 x 4
que é então invertível. Dentro do estojo
de um robô com mais de 6 articulações, que
nós nos referimos como um robô super acionado, a
matriz jacobiana tem mais colunas do que tem
linhas. É uma matriz 6 x N.
Para usar a matriz Jacobiana para controle,
tomamos seu pseudo-inverso. A
grande vantagem de um robô como este é que
podemos pensar em ter juntas sobressalentes e
podemos usar algumas dessas juntas sobressalentes para fazer
o que chamamos de movimento de espaço nulo. E enquanto
mantemos a pose ineficaz constante, nós
podemos ajustar todas as juntas para mudar o
formato do braço ou afaste as articulações
limites de movimento.